Examples in LTE (#54)
leanprover-community/blog: posts/lte-examples.md

(ulift.{1}  
  { f : S → X | ∃ (c : ℝ≥0) (g : S → filtration X c), 
    continuous g ∧ f = coe ∘ g }) := 
rfl
```

Since Lean's type theory does not have cumulative universes, this definition involves a universe bump using `ulift`, in order to obtain an object of `Ab.{1}` as opposed to `Ab.{0}` (see the discussion above).
Putting that aside, the sections of the condensed abelian group associated to a CHFPNG $X$ over a profinite set $S$ is the set of functions $f : S \to M$ which factor through a continuous map $g : S \to M_c$ for some $c$.

The group structure on this set of sections is the obivous one.
```lean
example (X : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.{0}) (S : Profinite.{0})
  (f g : Γ_ (CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.to_Condensed X) S) (s : S) :
  (f + g) s = f s + g s := rfl
```

## $p$-Radon measures
Fix a real number $p$ satisfying $0 < p \le 1$.
We will now discuss the relationship between $\mathcal{M}\_{p}(S)$ and the space of $p$-Radon measures.
First we address the question of actually defining the space of $p$-Radon measures.
Given any `S : Profinite.{0}`, and $p$ as above, we define `S.Radon_png p`, an object of `CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp₁`, as follows.

> As a set, it consists of all continuous linear maps $\mu : C(S,\mathbb{R}) \to \mathbb{R}$ such that there exists some $C \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$, where for any partition $S = V_1 \cup \cdots \cup V_n$ into disjoint clopen sets, letting $I_i \in C(S,\mathbb{R})$ denote the (continuous) indicator function of $V_i$, one has 
> $$ \sum_i |\mu(I_i)|^p \le C. $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a set, it consists of all continuous linear maps $\mu : C(S,\mathbb{R}) \to \mathbb{R}$ such that there exists some $C \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ satisfying the following condition:
For any partition $S = V_1 \cup \cdots \cup V_n$ into disjoint clopen sets, one has
$$ \sum_i |\mu(I_i)|^p \le C $$
where $I_i \in C(S,\mathbb{R})$ denotes the (continuous) indicator function of $V_i$.
```

> Since $S$ is compact, Hausdorff and totally disconnected, this does indeed agree with the usual space of signed $p$-Radon measures (which reduces to the usual notion of a signed Radon measure when $p = 1$). 

Author: Note to self: this identification only yields a homeomorphism on the subset of measures bounded by a given `c`.

We came up with two computations that were sufficiently convincing for us:

1. We showed that our definition of `Ext` yields a universal $\delta$-functor (in the first variable).
  Unfortunately, at the time of writing, $\delta$-functors are still not part of mathlib.
  Their definition is in the LTE repository, and can be found [here](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/25dc13f472934009786afaaaa2392fa2c8d73e3c/src/for_mathlib/universal_delta_functor/basic.lean#L24).
2. We did the very first exercise one might do when first learning about Ext groups: $\operatorname{Ext}^1(\mathbb{Z}/n,\mathbb{Z}/n) \cong \mathbb{Z}/n$.

## `Ext` vs. `Ext'`
While `mathlib` does have the definition of Ext groups of two objects in an abelian category with enough projectives, for the purposes of LTE, we had to also consider Ext groups of complexes.
We ended up making a new definition `Ext i A B` where `A` and `B` are arbitrary bounded above complexes in an abelian category with enough projectives (more precisely, we ended up working with the homotopy category of bounded above cochain complexes).

> The Ext groups for objects, denoted `Ext' i X Y` is then defined by viewing an object $X$ as the complex $X[0]$ concentrated in degree zero.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Ext groups for objects, denoted `Ext' i X Y`, is then defined by viewing an object $X$ as the complex $X[0]$ concentrated in degree zero.
```

```lean
example (n : ℕ) (X Y : 𝓐) :
  Ext' n (op X) Y =
  Ext n (op ↑X) ↑Y := rfl
```
The presence of `↑` in this code indicates that a coercion is involved.
In this case, it is the coercion from the abelian category `𝓐` to the bounded-above homotopy category of cochain complexes in `𝓐`, denoted `bounded_homotopy_category 𝓐` throughout the repository.

## `Ext'` as a $\delta$-functor
As aluded to in item 1 above, `Ext' i (-) Y` can be assembeled to form a (contravariant, cohomological) $\delta$-functor.
```lean
example (Y : 𝓐) : 𝓐ᵒᵖ ⥤δ Ab.{v} := Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y

example (n : ℕ) (Y : 𝓐) : 𝓐ᵒᵖ ⥤ Ab.{v} := Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y n

example (n : ℕ) (X Y : 𝓐) :
  (Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y n) (op X) = Ext' n (op X) Y :=
rfl
```

## Comparison with `Hom`
In degree zero `Ext' 0 X Y` is isomorphic to the usual Hom functor, as expected.
```lean

> example (X Y : 𝓐) : Ext' 0 (op X) Y ≅ AddCommGroup.of (X ⟶ Y) :=

Reviewer 2: This provides the iso for objects, right? Do we have the iso as functors? (I mean the natural transformation.)

Reviewer: Yes we do. But it's not as readable as this statement, I think.

For instance, if we did not need to refer to `translate_by_pos` in the future, we could have just written
```lean
example (a : ℕ) (ha : 0 < a) : 
  ℕ → ℕ := 
λ t, a + t
```
This can still be useful because it tells us that `λ t, a + t` is a valid function `ℕ → ℕ`, given the hypotheses on the first line. 

Examples can also be used to illustrate useful properties of preexisting definitions.
For instance,
```lean
example (a b : ℕ) (ha : 0 < a) : 
  0 < translate_by_pos a ha b :=
nat.add_pos_left ha b
```
tells us that `translate_by_pos a ha b` is positive for any natural number `b`.
Recall that `translate_by_pos a ha` is indeed a function `ℕ → ℕ`, and can thus be applied to `b`.

In this code block, we included `nat.add_pos_left ha b` (which requires an `import` statement that we have omitted).
This is the actual *proof* of the assertion that `translate_by_pos a ha b` is positive.
In most of the examples below, we merely want to convey that a proof (or some other object) *can* be constructed, without actually spelling it out.
In those cases, the actual code appearing after `:=` will be completely omitted in this blogpost.

> In some exceptional situations where the the actual definition is meaningful for a non-Lean-expert, an additional explanation will be provided.

Author: ```suggestion
In some exceptional situations where the actual definition is meaningful for a non-Lean-expert, an additional explanation will be provided.
```

The files in the examples folder describe how each of these ingredients has been formalized in the liquid tensor experiment.
We will discuss each file individually in the following sections.

# The real numbers

A linearly ordered field is called *conditionally complete* provided that every nonempty subset which is bounded above has a least upper bound, and every subset which is bounded below has a greatest lower bound.
The reals are an example of such a field, and any two such fields are (uniquely) isomorphic, as ordered fields.

The file [`examples/real.lean`](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/ebb498cdd2caa39d51e7668e4072dc15825a76d5/src/examples/real.lean) indicates these facts in the following examples as evidence that Leans' definition of the reals is correct.
```lean
-- The reals are a conditionally complete linearly ordered field.
example : conditionally_complete_linear_ordered_field ℝ := 
-- the proof ...

-- Any conditionally complete linearly ordered field `K` is 
-- isomorphic to the reals.

> example {K : Type*} [conditionally_complete_linear_ordered_field K] : 

Author: Explain "*"

  K ≃+*o ℝ := 
-- the proof ...

-- If `K` is a conditionally complete linearly ordered field
-- then any two order-preserving isomorphisms between `K` and 
-- the reals are equal.
example {K : Type*} [conditionally_complete_linear_ordered_field K] 
  (e₁ e₂ : K ≃+*o ℝ) : e₁ = e₂ := 
-- the proof ...
```
In the code above, the symbol `A ≃+*o B` is notation for the type of *isomorphisms of ordered rings* between `A` and `B`, indicating that such an isomorphism is compatible with addition (`+`), multiplication (`*`), and the ordering (`o`). 
This result is actually a [recent addition](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/pull/3292) to `mathlib`! 

This file also briefly mentions the following example regarding the nonnegative reals:
```lean
example : ℝ≥0 = {r : ℝ // r ≥ 0} :=
rfl
```
ilustrating that `ℝ≥0` is defined to be the collection of all real numbers $r$ satisfying $r \geq 0$.
This collection of nonnegative reals appears in the main statement of the challenge, and is otherwise used extensively throughout the project.

> In general, if `rfl` (or the tactic `refl`) can be used to prove an equality `A = B`, then `A` and `B` are equal *by definition!*

Author: Explain that `rfl/refl` stands for "reflexivity"

In Lean, the type of continuous maps between two topological spaces `X` and `Y` is denoted by `C(X,Y)`.
This type `C(X,Y)` of continuous maps from `X` to `Y` is defined as the type of *dependent pairs* `⟨f,hf⟩` where `f` is a function from `X` to `Y` and `hf` is a proof that `f` is continuous.
The word "dependent" is used because the proposition that `hf` proves *depends* on `f`.
The angled brackets in `⟨f,hf⟩` are Lean's anonymous constructor syntax, which allows us to construct an element of `C(X,Y)` from such a pair.
Here is the relevant code from [`examples/cond.lean`](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/ebb498cdd2caa39d51e7668e4072dc15825a76d5/src/examples/cond.lean) illustrating the behaviour of `C(X,Y)`.
```lean
-- Let `X` and `Y` be topological spaces.
variables {X Y : Type*} [topological_space X] [topological_space Y]

-- Any `f : C(X,Y)` yields a continuous function from `X` to `Y`.
example (f : C(X,Y)) : X → Y :=
f

example (f : C(X,Y)) : continuous f :=
-- The proof...

-- Conversely, any continuous function yields an element of `C(X,Y)`.
example (f : X → Y) (hf : continuous f) : C(X,Y) :=
⟨f,hf⟩
```

## The category structure on `Profinite`

> In Lean, the type of morphisms between objects `X` and `Y` in a category is denoted with a special arrow `X ⟶ Y`, not to be confused with the arrow used for the type of functions `X → Y`.

Author: Explain that the hom arrow is a little longer

In other words, a presheaf $\mathscr{F}$ of abelian groups on $\mathrm{Profinite}$ is a sheaf for this Grothendieck topology if and only if the following condition holds: For any profinite set $B$, finite jointly surjective family of morphisms $(X_i \to B)_i$, and families of elements $x_i \in \mathscr{F}(X_i)$ such that the restrictions of $x_i$ and $x_j$ agree in $\mathscr{F}(X_i \times_B X_j)$ for all $i,j$, there exists a unique element $s \in \mathscr{F}(B)$ whose restriction agrees with $x_i$ in $\mathscr{F}(X_i)$ for every $i$. 
Here is the statement written in Lean:
```lean
-- Let `F` be a presheaf on `Profinite.{0}` with values in `Ab.{1}`.
example (F : Profinite.{0}ᵒᵖ ⥤ Ab.{1}) :
  -- `F` is a sheaf for `proetale_topology` 
  presheaf.is_sheaf proetale_topology F 
  -- if and only if
  ↔ 
  -- for any finite indexing type `α`,
  ∀ (α : Fintype.{0}) 
  -- profinite set `B`,
    (B : Profinite.{0}) 
  -- family of profinite sets `X` indexed by `α`
    (X : α → Profinite.{0}) 
  -- which map to `B` with a family of maps `π`,
    (π : Π i, X i ⟶ B)
  -- such that `π` is jointly surjective,
    (hπ : ∀ b : B, ∃ i (x : X i), π i x = b) 

>   -- and all families of elements `x i : F (op $ X i)`,

Author: Get rid of `$` (elsewhere as well)

The collection of CHFPNGs forms a category where morphisms are morphisms of abelian groups which are compatible with the filtration in a non-strict sense.
Namely, a morphism $f : M \to N$ of CHFPNGs is a morphism of abelian groups such that there exists some constant $C \in \mathbb{R}\_{\geq 0}$ where $f$ restricts to *continuous* maps $M_c \to N_{C \cdot c}$ for all $c$.
In LTE, we call this category `CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.{0}` (again, the $0$ is the universe level of the underlying type).

Most of the CHFPNGs we're interested in are actually objects of a slightly different category than the one described above, which is denoted by `CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp₁`.
The objects of this category are CHFPNGs whose filtration is exhaustive, and the morphisms are assumed to be *strict*, meaning that a morphism $f : M \to N$ restricts to a continuous map $f : M_c \to N_c$ for all $c$.
There is an obvious forgetful functor to the non-strict category, which is denoted by `CHFPNG₁_to_CHFPNGₑₗ`:
```lean
example : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp₁ ⥤ CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp :=
CHFPNG₁_to_CHFPNGₑₗ

example (X : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp₁) :

>   (CHFPNG₁_to_CHFPNGₑₗ X : Type*) = X := 

Author: Get rid of `*` here

$$ \sum_i |\mu(I_i)|^p \le C, $$
where $I_i \in C(S,\mathbb{R})$ denotes the (continuous) indicator function of $V_i$.
Since $S$ is compact, Hausdorff and totally disconnected, one may verify that this agrees with the usual space of signed $p$-Radon measures (which reduces to the usual notion of a [signed Radon measure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radon_measure) when $p = 1$); see also Exercise 3.3 of [`Analytic.pdf`](https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/scholze/Analytic.pdf). 

The $c$-th part of the filtration on `S.Radon_png p` is given by those $\mu$ where the sums above are all bounded by `c`. 
If one endowes the continuous dual with the weak topology, this subspace agrees with the corresponding subspace of the space of signed $p$-Radon measures, and is a compact Hausdorff space.
From here, it is straightforward to see that `S.Radon_png p` is a CHFPNG.

We added several examples in the file `examples/radon_measures.lean` dedicated to this object `S.Radon_png p`.
First, any element of `S.Radon_png p` can be considered as a continuous functional on $C(S,\mathbb{R})$.
```lean

> example (S : Profinite.{0}) (μ : S.Radon_png p) : C(S,ℝ) →L[ℝ] ℝ := μ.1

Author: Mention that `Radon_png` is also defined in terms of dependent pairs, similarly to `C(X,Y)` and/or Sheaves.

```
In this code, `A →L[ℝ] B` is Lean's notation for the type of *continuous* $\mathbb{R}$-linear maps from `A` to `B`.

The boundedness condition mentioned above does indeed hold.
```lean
example (S : Profinite.{0}) (μ : S.Radon_png p) :
  ∃ c : ℝ≥0, -- there exists a constant `c` such that
  ∀ (ι : Fintype.{0}) -- for all finite indexing sets
    (V : ι → set S) -- and families of subsets of `S` indexed by `ι`,

>     (I : indexed_partition V) -- which form a partition of `V`

Author: ```suggestion
    (I : indexed_partition V) -- which form a partition of `S`
```

    (hV : ∀ i, is_clopen (V i)), -- by clopen subsets,
    -- The following bound holds true:
    ∑ i : ι, ∥ μ (clopens.indicator ⟨V i, hV i⟩) ∥₊^(p : ℝ) ≤ c :=
-- the proof...
```
In the code block above, the continuous function `clopens.indicator` is the indicator function on a clopen set.
```lean

> example (S : Profinite.{0}) (V : set S) (hV : is_clopen C) (s : S) :

Author: ```suggestion
example (S : Profinite.{0}) (V : set S) (hV : is_clopen V) (s : S) :
```

A $p$-Banach space is a topological real vector space $V$ such that there exists a $p$-norm on $V$ which induces the topology on $V$ and for which $V$ is complete.
Here a $p$-norm is a map $\|| \cdot \|| : V \to \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ which is similar to a norm, except that the scaling behavior involves $p$: $\|| a \cdot v \|| = |a|^p \cdot \|| v \||$ for all $a \in \mathbb{R}$ and $v \in V$. 
In LTE, the type of $p$-Banach spaces is denoted `pBanach.{0} p`.

## Basic properties
The topological properties of `V : pBanach.{0} p` are summarized in the following examples:
```lean
-- A `p`-Banach space is a topological (additive) group
example : topological_add_group V := -- the proof ...

-- which is a vector space over `ℝ`
example : module ℝ V := -- the proof ...

-- such that scalar multiplication is continuous,
example : has_continuous_smul ℝ V := -- the proof ...

-- `V` is complete,
example : complete_space V := -- the proof ...

-- and `V` is separated.
example : separated_space V := -- the proof ...
```

As expected, we should be able to *choose* a $p$-norm on such a `V`.
```lean
-- A choice of a `p`-norm on `V`.
def pBanach.has_norm : has_norm V :=

> (p_banach.exists_p_norm V.p_banach').some.to_has_norm

Author: Explain this notation a bit better.

```
Conversely, such sequences yield elements of `pBanach.lp p`.
```lean
example [fact (0 < p)] [fact (p ≤ 1)] (f : ℕ → ℝ) 
  (hf : summable (λ n, | f n |^(p : ℝ))) :
  pBanach.lp p :=
{ val := f, 
  property := ... }
```
Finally, the vector space structure is, of course, the obvious one given by the pointwise operations.
```lean
example [fact (0 < p)] [fact (p ≤ 1)] 
  (f g : pBanach.lp p) (n : ℕ) :
  (f + g) n = f n + g n := 
rfl

example [fact (0 < p)] [fact (p ≤ 1)] (a : ℝ) 
  (f : pBanach.lp p) (n : ℕ) :
  (a • f) n = a * f n := 
rfl
```

# `Ext` groups

The file [`examples/Ext.lean`](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/ebb498cdd2caa39d51e7668e4072dc15825a76d5/src/examples/Ext.lean) was arguably the original motivation for the `examples` folder.
After the liquid tensor experiment was completed, we joked about the fact that we could have "accidentily" defined `Ext` to always be zero!

![ext-zulip](/images/lte-ext-zulip-1.png)
![ext-zulip](/images/lte-ext-zulip-2.png)

Of course, then quickly came the question of how we could be convinced that the definition we had was correct.

We came up with two computations that were sufficiently convincing for us:

> 1. We showed that our definition of `Ext` yields a universal $\delta$-functor (in the first variable).

Author: Add a link to the wikipedia article about delta functors.

example
  (p' p : ℝ≥0) [fact (0 < p')] [fact (p' < p)] [fact (p ≤ 1)]
  (S : Profinite.{0}) (V : pBanach.{0} p) :
  ∀ i > 0,
    Ext i (ℳ_{p'} S) V =
    Ext' i (op (ℳ_{p'} S)) (Condensed.of_top_ab V) :=
by { intros, refl }
```

## `Ext'` as a $\delta$-functor
As aluded to in item 1 above, `Ext' i (-) Y`  for $i \geq 0$ can be assembeled to form a (contravariant, cohomological) $\delta$-functor, which we denote by `Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y`.
```lean
-- The functor `Ext^*(-,Y)`, as a `δ`-functor.
example (Y : 𝓐) : 𝓐ᵒᵖ ⥤δ Ab.{v} := 
Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y

-- The `n`-th component of this `δ`-functor is a regular functor.
example (n : ℕ) (Y : 𝓐) : 𝓐ᵒᵖ ⥤ Ab.{v} := 
Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y n

-- The `n`-th component of this `δ`-functor is defined using `Ext' n`.
example (n : ℕ) (X Y : 𝓐) :
  (Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y n) (op X) = Ext' n (op X) Y :=
rfl
```
Here we are using a new notation `⥤δ` for the collection of delta functors (recall that `⥤` is notation for the collection of *functors*).

## Comparison with `Hom`

In degree zero `Ext' 0 X Y` is isomorphic to the usual Hom functor, as expected.
```lean
example (X Y : 𝓐) : Ext' 0 (op X) Y ≅ AddCommGroup.of (X ⟶ Y) :=
(Ext'_zero_flip_iso _ _).app _
```

> Similarly to `Profinite.of` used above, `AddCommGroup.of A` constructs an object of `Ab` from an abelian group `A`.

Author: Add more description about the notations in these examples.

However, the syntax indicating this functoriality is not quite as readable as the example above:
```lean
example (Y : 𝓐) : (Ext' 0).flip.obj Y ≅ preadditive_yoneda.obj Y :=
Ext'_zero_flip_iso 𝓐 Y
```
The important observation to make is that `Ext'_zero_flip_iso 𝓐 Y`, which is a natural isomorphism of *functors*, is used to obtain the isomorphism in both of the above examples. 
The only difference is that we *specialize* (or *apply*, hence the `.app`) this natural isomorphism to the object `X` to obtain the first isomorphism from the second.

## Universality
Finally, if `G` is another (contravariant, cohomological) $\delta$-functor and $e_0 : \operatorname{Hom}(-,Y) \to G^0$ is a natural transformation, then there exists a unique morphism of delta functors from `Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y` to `G` which restricts to $e_0$ after composition with the isomorphism `Ext'_zero_flip_iso` mentioned in the previous subsection.
In other words, our $\delta$-functor `Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y` is *universal*.
```lean
theorem Ext_δ_functor_is_universal_for_Hom (Y : 𝓐) (F : 𝓐ᵒᵖ ⥤δ Ab.{v})
  (e0 : preadditive_yoneda Y ⟶ F 0) :
  ∃! (e : Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y ⟶ F),

>   e0 = (Ext'_zero_flip_iso _ _).inv ≫ (e : Ext_δ_functor 𝓐 Y ⟶ F) 0 :=

Author: Explain the `.inv`.

---
author: 'Adam Topaz'
category: ''
date: 2022-10-11
description: ''
has_math: true
link: ''
slug: lte-examples
tags: ''
title: On definitions in the liquid tensor experiment
type: text
---

> Last month, we announced the [completion of the liquid tensor experiment](/posts/lte-final/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A while ago, we announced the [completion of the liquid tensor experiment](/posts/lte-final/).
```

  ℕ → ℕ := 
λ t, a + t
```
In this case, we are making a *definition* which can be later accessed with the name `translate_by_pos`.
The code to the left of the `:` on the first line can be thought of as "hypotheses" for the definition, which in this case consists of a natural number `a` and a hypothesis `ha` that `a` is positive.

The code after the `:` at the end of the first line and before the `:=` on the second line tells Lean what to expect from the actual definition.
In this case, we are defining a function from `ℕ` to itself, and the collection of such functions is denoted with an arrow as `ℕ → ℕ`.

The text following `:=` is the actual definition which in this case is `λ t, a + t`.
This is an (unnamed) function declared with notation from lambda calculus.
A mathematician might write $t \mapsto a + t$ instead.

## Examples vs definitions

An example is just like a definition, except that it will not add any declaration to the current environment, so it does not require that a name is provided.
For instance, if we did not need to refer to `translate_by_pos` in the future, we could have just written
```lean
example (a : ℕ) (ha : 0 < a) : 
  ℕ → ℕ := 
λ t, a + t
```

> This can still useful because it tells us that `λ t, a + t` is a valid element of `ℕ → ℕ`, given the hypotheses on the first line. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can still be useful because it tells us that `λ t, a + t` is a valid element of `ℕ → ℕ`, given the hypotheses on the first line. 
```

  It turns out that elements of $\lim\_i\mathbb{R}[S_i]\_{\le c}$ can be identified with continuous linear maps $C(S,\mathbb{R}) \to \mathbb{R}$ satisfying an analogous "bounded-by-$c$" condition. 
  Here $C(S,\mathbb{R})$ is a Banach space with respect to the sup norm and its linear dual is endowed with the weak topology.
  It is in this sense that one can consider $\mathcal{M}\_{p'}(S)$ as the space of $p'$-measures on the profinite set $S$. 
2. The `Ext` groups appearing in the statement of the theorem are computed in the category $\mathrm{Cond(Ab)}$ of condensed abelian groups, which is the category of sheaves of abelian groups on the category of profinite sets with respect to the Grothendieck topology where a cover of $B$ is a finite jointly surjective family of morphisms $(X_i \to B)_{i}$.
  This is an exceptionally nice abelian category with compact projective generators.
3. It's possible to interpret any topological abelian group as a condensed abelian group.
   For example, any $p'$-Banach space $V$, which is a topological vector space over $\mathbb{R}$ satisfying additional conditions, can be viewed as an object of $\mathrm{Cond(Ab)}$.

>    It's also possible to interpret $\mathcal{M}\_{p'}(S)$ (better, any CompHaus-filtered-pseudo-normed-group) as a condensed abelian group. 

Author: I modified the wording a bit... It still uses a 30-letter word, but at least I make the vagueness explicit :)

   See below for more details.

The files in the examples folder describe how each of these ingredients has been formalized in the liquid tensor experiment.
We will discuss each file individually in the following sections.

# The real numbers

A linearly ordered field is called *conditionally complete* provided that every subset which is bounded above has a least upper bound, and every subset which is bounded below has a greatest lower bound.
The reals are an example of such a field, and any two such fields are (uniquely) isomorphic, as ordered fields.

The file [`examples/real.lean`](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/13777e1f84a324030eed48e636550aee90f8656f/src/examples/real.lean) indicates these facts in the following examples as evidence that Leans' definition of the reals is correct.
```lean
-- The reals are a conditionally complete linearly ordered field.
example : conditionally_complete_linear_ordered_field ℝ := 
-- the proof ...

-- Any conditionally complete linearly ordered field `K` is 

> -- isomoprphic to the reals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- isomorphic to the reals.
```

example {K : Type*} [conditionally_complete_linear_ordered_field K] : 
  K ≃+*o ℝ := 
-- the proof ...

-- If `K` is a conditionally complete linearly ordered field
-- then any two order-preserving isomorphisms between `K` and 
-- the reals are equal.
example {K : Type*} [conditionally_complete_linear_ordered_field K] 
  (e₁ e₂ : K ≃+*o ℝ) : e₁ = e₂ := 
-- the proof ...
```
In the code above, the symbol `A ≃+*o B` is notation for the type of *isomorphisms of ordered rings* between `A` and `B`, indicating that such an isomorphism is compatible with addition (`+`), multiplication (`*`), and the ordering (`o`). 
This result is actually a [recent addition](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/pull/3292) to `mathlib`! 

This file also briefly mentions the following example regarding the nonnegative reals:
```lean
example : ℝ≥0 = {r : ℝ // r ≥ 0} :=
rfl

> ```

Author: Note to self: Move description about `rfl` to this section.

ilustrating that `ℝ≥0` is defined to be the collection of all real numbers $r$ satisfying $r \geq 0$.

> This collection of nonnegative reals appreas in the main statement of the challenge, and otherwise used extensively throughout the project.

Author: ```suggestion
This collection of nonnegative reals appears in the main statement of the challenge, and otherwise used extensively throughout the project.
```

> This collection of nonnegative reals appreas in the main statement of the challenge, and otherwise used extensively throughout the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This collection of nonnegative reals appears in the main statement of the challenge, and is used extensively throughout the project.
```

# Profinite sets and condensed abelian groups

> Let's discuss the file [`examples/profinite.lean`](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/13777e1f84a324030eed48e636550aee90f8656f/src/examples/profinite.lean), which explains the formalization of profinite sets, and condensed abelian groups.

Author: TODO: rename `profinite.lean` -> `condensed.lean` and update the file description as needed.

## Profinite sets
First of all, we have the category `Profinite` of profinite sets.
```lean
example : Type 1 := Profinite.{0}
```
As can be seen in the code above, there is an additional decoration `{0}`, and `Profinite.{0}` is a *term* of `Type 1`.
The `0` and `1` here are universe annotations.

> Namely, `Profinite.{0}` is the type of all profinite sets `X`, where the underlying type of `X` lives in `Type = Type 0`. 

Author: Done!

F.1

example (F : Condensed.{0} Ab.{1}) : 
  presheaf.is_sheaf proetale_topology F.1 := 
F.2

example (F : Profinite.{0}ᵒᵖ ⥤ Ab.{1}) 
  (hF : presheaf.is_sheaf proetale_topology F) :
  Condensed.{0} Ab.{1} := 
⟨F,hF⟩
```
Note that we again use Lean's anonymous constructor syntax `⟨F,hF⟩` in the last example.

## A comment on universes
One last comment about universes is warranted in this section.
Just like `Profinite.{0}` is the category of profinite sets whose underlying type lives in `Type 0`, the category `Ab.{1}` is the category of abelian groups whose underlying type lives in `Type 1`.
We need to bump the universe level of the category of abelian groups precisely because `Profinite.{0}` is a *large category*, meaning that `Profinite.{0} : Type 1`, while `X ⟶ Y : Type 0` for `X Y : Profinite.{0}`.
Technically speaking, condensed mathematics in the sense of [Clausen-Scholze](https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/scholze/Condensed.pdf) works in ZFC by imposing cardinality bounds on profinite sets, whereas our approach more closely resembles that of *pyknotic objects*, in the sense of [Barwick-Haine](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09966).

> See the footnote on page 7 of [`Condensed.pdf`](https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/scholze/Condensed.pdf) and/or section 0.3 of [Barwick-Haine](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1904.09966.pdf) for the comparison between condensed and pyknotic sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the footnote on page 7 of [`Condensed.pdf`](https://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/scholze/Condensed.pdf) and/or section 0.3 of [Barwick-Haine](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09966) for the comparison between condensed and pyknotic sets.
```
For consistency with the link above. (And because linking to `abs` is better in general, I think.)

# Radon Measures

Next we discuss the file [`examples/radon_measures.lean`](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/13777e1f84a324030eed48e636550aee90f8656f/src/examples/radon_measures.lean), which covers the condensed abelian group $\mathcal{M}_{p'}(S)$ and its relationship with signed Radon measures.

## Pseudo-normed groups
There are really two sides in this project: the condensed side, which deals with the category of condensed abelian groups, and a more concrete side which deals with so-called pseudo-normed groups.
A *pseudo-normed group* is an (additive) abelian group $M$ endowed with an increasing filtration $M_c$ indexed by $c \in \mathbb{R}\_{\geq 0}$ satisfying the following conditions:

> 1. The neutral element $0$ is contained in $M_c$ for all $c$.

Author: Yes, this is of course equivalent, but I wanted to stay as close as possible to the Lean definition we have in the LTE repo, where we have the "forall c, ..." condition for 0.

There is an obvious forgetful functor to the non-strict category, which is denoted by `CHFPNG₁_to_CHFPNGₑₗ`:
```lean
example : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp₁ ⥤ CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp :=
CHFPNG₁_to_CHFPNGₑₗ

example (X : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp₁) :
  (CHFPNG₁_to_CHFPNGₑₗ X : Type*) = X := 
rfl
```

## The associated condensed abelian group
There is a natural functor from `CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.{0}` to `Condensed.{0} Ab.{1}` which sends $M$ to the colimit $\bigcup_c M_c$.
Here $M_c$ is viewed as a condensed *set* whose underlying presheaf is the restriction to `Profinite.{0}` of the representable presheaf associated to the topological space $M_c$.
In LTE, we defined this functor in a more hands-on way.
The functor itself is called `CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.to_Condensed`:
```lean
example : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.{0} ⥤ Condensed.{0} Ab.{1} :=
CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.to_Condensed
```
and on objects it is defined as follows: 
```lean
example (X : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.{0}) (S : Profinite.{0}) :
(Γ_ S (CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.to_Condensed X) : Type 1) =
(ulift.{1}  
  { f : S → X | ∃ (c : ℝ≥0) (g : S → filtration X c), 
    continuous g ∧ f = coe ∘ g }) := 
rfl
```

> If `X : Condensed.{0} Ab.{1}` and `S : Profinite.{0}`, then the notation `Γ_ S X` appearing in the second line should be read as $\Gamma(S,X)$, i.e. the sections of `X` over `S`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `S : Profinite.{0}` and `X : Condensed.{0} Ab.{1}`, then the notation `Γ_ S X` appearing in the second line should be read as $\Gamma(S,X)$, i.e. the sections of `X` over `S`.
```

> Since Lean's type theory does not have cumulative universes, the definition of `CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.to_Condensed` involves a universe bump using `ulift`, in order to obtain an object of `Ab.{1}` as opposed to `Ab.{0}` (see the discussion above).

Reviewer: If you want to be 100% precise then there is no way around it.

> Since Lean's type theory does not have cumulative universes, the definition of `CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.to_Condensed` involves a universe bump using `ulift`, in order to obtain an object of `Ab.{1}` as opposed to `Ab.{0}` (see the discussion above).

Author: I added several sentences about universes in the section on profinite sets that hopefully should clarify some of the concerns here.

> Putting that aside, the sections $\Gamma(S,X)$ of the condensed abelian group associated to a CHFPNG $X$ over a profinite set $S$ is the set of functions $f : S \to M$ which factor through a continuous map $g : S \to M_c$ for some $c$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putting that aside, the sections $\Gamma(S,X)$ of the condensed abelian group associated to a CHFPNG $X$ over a profinite set $S$ is the set of functions $f : S \to M$ which factor as the composition of a continuous map $g : S \to M_c$ and the natural inclusion $\mathttt{coe} : M_c \to M$ for some $c$.
```

The group structure on this set of sections is the obivous one, given by pointwise addition.
```lean
example (X : CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.{0}) (S : Profinite.{0})
  (f g : Γ_ S (CompHausFiltPseuNormGrp.to_Condensed X)) (s : S) :

>   (f + g) s = f s + g s := rfl

Author: I've opted for `rfl -- true by definition!`

The Ext groups for objects, denoted `Ext' i X Y`, is then defined by viewing an object $X$ as the complex $X[0]$ concentrated in degree zero.

```lean
example (n : ℕ) (X Y : 𝓐) :
  Ext' n (op X) Y =
  Ext n (op ↑X) ↑Y := 
rfl
```
In this code block, `𝓐` denotes any abelian category with enough projectives.
The presence of `↑` in this code indicates that a coercion is involved.
In this case, it is the coercion from the abelian category `𝓐` to the bounded-above homotopy category of cochain complexes in `𝓐`, denoted `bounded_homotopy_category 𝓐` throughout the repository.

The symbol `Ext` appearing in the statement of the [challenge](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean-liquid/blob/13777e1f84a324030eed48e636550aee90f8656f/src/challenge.lean) is simply notation for `Ext'`:
```lean
example
  (p' p : ℝ≥0) [fact (0 < p')] [fact (p' < p)] [fact (p ≤ 1)]
  (S : Profinite.{0}) (V : pBanach.{0} p) :
  ∀ i > 0,
    Ext i (ℳ_{p'} S) V =
    Ext' i (op (ℳ_{p'} S)) (Condensed.of_top_ab V) :=

> by { intros, refl }

Author: Unfortunately, this doesn't work (some of the fancy automation behind the scenes fails if `i` is moved before `:`). It's annoying and we could spend some time trying to modify the tactic used in this automation, but I don't think it's worth it.

```lean
example (S : Profinite.{0}) (μ : S.Radon_png p) : C(S,ℝ) →L[ℝ] ℝ := μ.1
```
In this code, `A →L[ℝ] B` denotes the type of continuous $\mathbb{R}$-linear maps from `A` to `B`.

The boundedness condition mentioned above does indeed hold.
```lean
example (S : Profinite.{0}) (μ : S.Radon_png p) :
  ∃ c : ℝ≥0, -- there exists a constant `c` such that
  ∀ (ι : Fintype.{0}) -- for all finite indexing sets
    (V : ι → set S) -- and families of subsets of `S` indexed by `ι`,
    (I : indexed_partition V) -- which form a partition of `V`
    (hV : ∀ i, is_clopen (V i)), -- by clopen subsets,
    -- The following bound holds true:
    ∑ i : ι, ∥ μ (clopens.indicator ⟨V i, hV i⟩) ∥₊^(p : ℝ) ≤ c :=
-- the proof...
```
In the code block above, the continuous function `clopens.indicator` is the indicator function on a clopen set.
```lean
example (S : Profinite.{0}) (V : set S) (hV : is_clopen C) (s : S) :

>   clopens.indicator ⟨V,hV⟩ s = if s ∈  then 1 else 0 := rfl

Reviewer: This isn't intentional, right?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  clopens.indicator ⟨V,hV⟩ s = if s ∈ V then 1 else 0 := rfl
```
